\input texinfo

@setfilename maplev.info
@include version.texi
@settitle MapleV Emacs Mode @value{VERSION}

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* MapleV: (maplev).       Emacs mode for developing Maple code.
@end direntry

@copying
MapleV is a GNU Emacs major mode for developing source code for Maple, 
a computer algebra system (CAS) from @w{Waterloo Maple Inc}.  MapleV is
written entirely in Emacs-Lisp and is distributed under the GNU General
Public License.

This manual is for MapleV version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2011, Joseph S. Riel

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License.''
@end quotation
@end copying



@setchapternewpage on

@titlepage
@title MapleV
@subtitle A GNU Emacs Mode for Maple Developers
@subtitle MapleV Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{DATE}
  
@author Joseph S.@ Riel
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Maple is a registered trademark of Waterloo Maple Inc.@*

Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2010 Joseph S. Riel@*
 
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@end titlepage
@page


@node top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top MapleV

@insertcopying

@menu
* Introduction::                A brief tour of MapleV's features.
* Basics::                      A few basics.

Editing

* Indentation::                 Indenting Maple code.
* Font Lock::                   Syntactic highlighting of Maple code.
* Comments::                    Commands for adding and aligning comments.
* Shortcuts::                   Templates.
* Imenu support::               Creating a procedure index.
* Miscellaneous features::      Useful editing features

Processes

* Configuration::               Configuring executables.
* Mint::                        Syntax checking.
* Maple::                       Running Maple as a standalone process.
* Help pages::                  Displaying Maple help pages.
* Viewing::                     Viewing Maple library code.

Appendices

* Installation::                Installing MapleV.
* Evolution::                   Credits, Bugs, Enhancements.

Indices

* Key Index::                   Key bindings and where they are described.
* Function Index::              Functions mentioned in the manual.
* Variable Index::              Variables mentioned in the manual.
* Concept Index::               Concepts and features.

* GNU Free Documentation License::  Copying this manual.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Summary::
* Requirements::

Indentation

* Indentation Commands::        Commands for inserting and aligning comments.
* Customizing Indentation::     Variables that affect indentation.
* Indentation Tricks::          Forcing and preventing indentation.
* Indentation Details::         Overview of the indentation algorithm.

Indentation Tricks

* Forcing indentation::         Using parentheses to force indentation.
* Preventing indentation::      Using continued comments to prevent indentation.

Shortcuts

* Templates::                   Inserting procedures and assignments.

Miscellaneous features

* Include statements::          Active include statements.
* LINK::                        Hyperlink to a file.
* Indent trace output::         Hierarchically indent Maple trace output.

Configuration

* Configuration Object::        Configuring MapleV executables and their options.
* Configuration Example::       Example configuration (.maplev file).

Mint

* Running mint::                Commands for sending code to @command{mint}.
* Mint mode::                   Mode for viewing the output of @command{mint}.

Maple

* Running Maple::               Commands for sending code to the Maple engine.
* Cmaple mode::                 Mode for interacting with Maple.

Help pages

* Displaying help pages::       Commands for displaying Maple help pages.
* MapleV help mode::            Mode for viewing Maple help pages.

Viewing

* Displaying::                  Commands to display Maple expressions.
* MapleV view mode::            Mode for viewing Maple library code.

Installation

* Emacs Files::                 Installing and byte-compiling the lisp files
* Maple Files::                 Installing the Maple archive
* Customizing::                 Customizing the installation.
* Info documentation::          Installing the Info documentation.

Evolution

* Bugs::
* Acknowledgments::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction, Basics, top, top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction

@iftex
MapleV is a GNU Emacs major mode for developing source code for Maple, 
a computer algebra system (CAS) owned by @w{Waterloo Maple Inc}.  In
this manual @dfn{MapleV} refers to the Emacs major mode and @dfn{Maple}
to the CAS.  MapleV is written entirely in Emacs-Lisp and is distributed
under the GNU General Public License.
@end iftex

@menu
* Summary::
* Requirements::
@end menu

@node Summary, Requirements, Introduction, Introduction
@section Summary
@cindex Summary

Following is a brief tour of MapleV's major features.

@subsection Indentation

Maple source code is grammatically indented, either as you enter it or
all at once.  Customizable variables permit a limited control of the
indentation style.  The default settings produce a result that is very
close to the pretty printed output of Maple.

@subsection Font Lock

Maple reserved words, special words, initial variables, built-in
functions, and top-level procedure assignments are font locked.
Comments and quotes are syntactically highlighted.  The amount of
``decoration'' can be customized.

@subsection Comments

Commands are provided for inserting and aligning Maple comments.
Auto-filling can be enabled so that comments automatically wrap.

@subsection Shortcuts

A blank procedure template, including your copyright statement,
can be inserted into the source.  It queries for the name of the procedure,
optional arguments, and a description.

@subsection Mint interface

All or portions of the buffer can be sent to @code{mint}, Maple's syntax
checker.  The output is displayed in a buffer with a mode that
highlights and activates warnings and error messages.  Clicking on the
activated text either moves the cursor to the appropriate point in the
source code or queries to automatically correct the error.

@subsection Maple interface

All or portions of the buffer can be sent to the command line version of
Maple, which is run in its own buffer.  You can work directly in that
buffer to exercise the source code.

@subsection Online help

Help pages from Maple help databases can be called up and displayed in a
buffer.  The buffer has a mode that font locks section headings and
provides commands for viewing other help pages and recalling previously
visited pages.

@subsection Viewing library code

Modules and procedures from Maple libraries can be displayed in a
buffer.  They are font-locked the same as in a MapleV buffer.  A history
provides a convenient means to return to previously displayed code.

@node Requirements,  , Summary, Introduction
@section Requirements
@cindex Requirements for MapleV

MapleV has been used with Maple version from 4 to 2015,
with GNU Emacs 22 to 24, and on Linux, Mac, and Windows machines.

@node Basics, Indentation, Introduction, top
@chapter Basics
@cindex Top-level procedures
@cindex Menubar

For MapleV to properly locate, fontify, and index @dfn{top-level
procedures}, that is, non-nested procedure assignments, the procedure
name @emph{must} be flush left.  Indenting the buffer moves top-level
procedures to the left margin.

There are a few exceptional cases in which what should be top-level
procedures are, in fact, not.  The primary example is a Maple script in
which procedures are conditionally assigned.  See @ref{Preventing
indentation}, for an illustration and a method to automatically indent
these procedures to the left column.

Most of the higher-level MapleV functions, those that do more than edit
text, are available on the menu-bar.




@node Indentation, Font Lock, Basics, top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Indentation
@cindex Indentation

Maple source code is indented according to its grammar.  The indentation
can occur either as you enter the code or all at once; the latter action
is useful when working with non-indented source code.  A grammatical
error, typically an out-of-place keyword or parenthesis, generates an
error and moves the cursor to the place where the error was detected.

@menu
* Indentation Commands::        Commands for inserting and aligning comments.
* Customizing Indentation::     Variables that affect indentation.
* Indentation Tricks::          Forcing and preventing indentation.
* Indentation Details::         Overview of the indentation algorithm.
@end menu


@node Indentation Commands, Customizing Indentation, Indentation, Indentation
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Commands

@cindex Indentation commands
@cindex Commands, indentation

@kindex C-j
@kindex C-c @key{TAB} @key{TAB}
@kindex C-c @key{TAB} b
@kindex C-c @key{TAB} p
@kindex C-c @key{TAB} r

@findex maplev-electric-tab
@findex maplev-indent-newline
@findex maplev-indent-buffer
@findex maplev-indent-procedure
@findex maplev-indent-region

@table @kbd
@item @key{TAB}
Indent the current line (@code{maplev-electric-tab}).

@item C-j
Indent the current line, insert a new line, and indent that line
(@code{maplev-indent-newline}).

@item C-c @key{TAB} @key{TAB}
@itemx C-c @key{TAB} b
Indent the buffer (@code{maplev-indent-buffer}).

@item C-c @key{TAB} k
Clear the indentation information (@code{maplev-indent-clear-info}).
To increase speed, MapleV's indentation algorithm stores
the last valid indentation point.  Moving the point may
occasionally cause indentation errors; use this procedure
to recompute the indentation point.

@item C-c @key{TAB} p
Indent a procedure (@code{maplev-indent-procedure}).
The smallest procedure, or module, at point is indented.

@item C-c @key{TAB} r
Indent the region (@code{maplev-indent-region}).
The selected region is indented.

@end table


@node Customizing Indentation, Indentation Tricks, Indentation Commands, Indentation
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Customizing
@cindex Customizing indentation
@cindex Indentation, customizing

The following variables affect indentation:

@vtable @code

@vindex maplev-indent-level
@item maplev-indent-level
The amount a subblock is indented. The default is 4.

@vindex maplev-indent-tabs-mode
@item maplev-indent-tabs-mode
Non-nil means tabs may be used to indent.  The default is nil.

@vindex maplev-indent-declaration
@item maplev-indent-declaration-level
This value is used to initialize the buffer-local variable
@code{maplev-indent-declaration}, which sets the amount Maple procedure
declarations (@code{local}, @code{global}, @code{option}, and
@code{description}) are indented.  The default is 0.

@item maplev-dont-indent-re
A regular expression or nil.  If non-nil then lines that begin with a match are not
indented.  The default, @samp{"#"}, prevents flush left comment lines
from being indented.

@item maplev-tab-width
This integer value is used to initialize the value of @code{tab-width}.

@findex maplev-get-tab-width-function
@item maplev-get-tab-width-function
If assigned, this function is called with the filename of the current buffer
when @code{maplev-mode} is executed.  It should return the desired value
of @code{tab-width}.  If not assigned, @code{maplev-tab-width} is used as
the value.

@end vtable


@node Indentation Tricks, Indentation Details, Customizing Indentation, Indentation
@section Indentation Tricks

The indentation algorithm is not perfect.  It can fail to indent code
that should be indented or it may indent code that should not be
indented.  The following sections give examples and demonstrate workarounds.

@menu
* Forcing indentation::         Using parentheses to force indentation.
* Preventing indentation::      Using continued comments to prevent indentation.
@end menu


@node Forcing indentation, Preventing indentation, Indentation Tricks, Indentation Tricks
@subsection Forcing indentation
@cindex Forcing indentation
@cindex Indentation, forcing
@cindex Indenting continued expressions
@cindex Continued expression, indenting

MapleV's indentation algorithm does not (currently) handle continued
expressions.  It aligns continuations with the left most
character in the preceding line.  In an assignment it is preferable to
align with the right side of the assignment.  

@subsubheading Problem

Indenting the following code causes the continued line to be left
aligned with the preceding line, as the following illustrates:

@example
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
y := a + ( ... ) 
     + b;@point{}
---------- Buffer: foo ----------

@key{TAB}
   @result{}
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
y := a + ( ... ) 
+ b;@point{}
---------- Buffer: foo ----------        
@end example

@subsubheading Solution

Use extra parentheses to prevent the continuation line from being
aligned with the opening column:

@example
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
y := ( a + ( ... ) 
       + b );
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end example


@node Preventing indentation,  , Forcing indentation, Indentation Tricks
@subsection Preventing indentation

@subsubheading Problem

Consider an installation script in which the procedures @samp{foo1} and
@samp{foo2} are assigned only when the flag @code{assign_procs} is
@samp{true}.  The following example shows what happens when the buffer
is indented.

@example
@group
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
if assign_procs then
foo1 := proc() ... end:
foo2 := proc() ... end:
fi:
---------- Buffer: foo ----------

@kbd{M-x maplev-indent-buffer}
   @result{}
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
if assign_procs then
    foo1 := proc() ... end:
    foo2 := proc() ... end:
fi:
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group
@end example


Because @code{foo1} and @code{foo2} are no longer flush left they are
not recognized as top-level procedures.  Their names are not properly
font locked and MapleV commands that operate on top-level procedures do
not work on them.

@subsubheading Solution

Because MapleV ignores comment continuations that Maple respects
(@ref{Comments}), we can use the following technique to prevent
@samp{foo1} and @samp{foo2} from being indented.

@example
@group
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
if assign_procs then       #\
fi                         # @r{Maple does not see this line}
foo1 := proc() ... end:
foo2 := proc() ... end:
#\
if then                    # @r{Maple does not see this line}
fi:
---------- Buffer: foo ----------
@end group
@end example

MapleV ignores the comment continuations and determines that each
@code{if} statement is completed on the following line.  The procedures
@code{foo1} and @code{foo2} are not indented.  Maple, however, continues
the comments and so matches the initial @code{if} to the final
@code{fi}; it ignores the dummy statements.




@node Indentation Details,  , Indentation Tricks, Indentation
@section Indentation Details
@cindex Indentation details
@cindex Details, indentations
@cindex Indentation grammar
@cindex Grammar, indentation
@cindex Indenting, speed of
@cindex Speed of, indenting

A grammar table (@code{maplev--grammar-alist}) defines the grammar
used to indent Maple code.

MapleV parses the source to compute the appropriate indentation for each
line.  To speed this process, information from the last parse is saved
and reused.  This method allows it to indent entire buffers reasonably
quickly; the largest file in the Maple R5 share library
(@file{gdev.mpl}, 160K, by Bruno Salvy) took twelve seconds to indent on
a PC running NTEmacs.  During editing, if the buffer is modified above
the last indentation location then the indentation information is lost;
consequently, you may occasionally notice small delays as the source is
reparsed.



@node Font Lock, Comments, Indentation, top
@chapter Font Lock
@cindex Font lock


@cindex Font lock, decoration level
@cindex Decoration level, font lock
@cindex Maximum decoration, font lock

@vindex font-lock-maximum-decoration
@findex maplev-reset-font-lock

The amount of syntactical highlighting, or ``decoration'', is controlled
by the global variable @code{font-lock-maximum-decoration}, which you
may set in your @file{.emacs} file.  @inforef{Font Lock,,emacs}, for
information.  MapleV mode provides three levels of decoration:

@enumerate
@item 
Comments, quotes, top-level procedure names and Maple reserved works
are highlighted.

@item 
Everything in level 1 plus Maple special words, initial variables, and
the ditto operators are highlighted.

@item
Everything in level 2 plus Maple built-in functions are highlighted.

@end enumerate

Execute @kbd{M-x maplev-reset-font-lock @key{RET} LEVEL @key{RET}} or
use the menubar, @kbd{MapleV -> Setup -> Decoration}, to change the
decoration in a MapleV buffer.  @code{LEVEL} is an integer from 1 to 3.


@node Comments, Shortcuts, Font Lock, top
@chapter Comments

@cindex Comments

@kindex M-;
@kindex C-x ;
@kindex C-u - C-x ;
@kindex M-q

@findex indent-for-comment
@findex set-comment-column
@findex kill-comment
@findex fill-paragraph

@vindex comment-column
@vindex fill-column


MapleV uses standard Emacs commands to enter, align and fill Maple
comments.  @inforef{Comments,,emacs}. The commands are reproduced here
for convenience.

@table @kbd
@item M-; 
Insert or align an inline comment (@code{indent-for-comment}).  The
comment character is inserted at column @code{comment-column}.

@item C-x ;
Set comment column (@code{set-comment-column}).

@item C-u - C-x ;
Kill comment on current line (@code{kill-comment }).

@item M-q
Fill a comment (@code{fill-paragraph}).  Wrap lines at column
@code{fill-column} and insert new comment characters, aligned with the
original comment character.

@end table

The following variables affect comments:

@vtable @code
@item maplev-auto-fill-comment-flag
A boolean flag. If non-nil, the default, comment lines wrap as they are
typed.  Wrapping, however, does not automatically start in an inline
comment; it must be invoked with @code{fill-paragraph}.

@item maplev-comment-string
String variable inserted by @code{indent-for-comment}.
The default is @samp{# }.

@item maplev-comment-column
Initial value of @code{comment-column}.  The default is 40.

@item maplev-comment-fill-column
Initial value of @code{fill-column}.  The default is 79.

@end vtable

Maple comment lines can be continued to the next line by ending them
with a backslash.  MapleV does @emph{not} recognize this continuation
and interprets the following line as code.  This can fool the MapleV
indentation grammar; however, it can also be used to achieve certain
effects.  @xref{Preventing indentation}, for an example.


@node Shortcuts, Imenu support, Comments, top
@chapter Shortcuts
@cindex Shortcuts

@menu
* Templates::                   Inserting procedures and assignments.
@end menu



@node Templates,  , Shortcuts, Shortcuts
@section Templates
@cindex Templates
@cindex Procedure template
@cindex Template, procedure
@cindex Assignment operator, template

@kindex C-;

@findex maplev-template-proc
@findex maplev-insert-assignment-operator

@table @kbd
@item C-c C-t p
@kindex C-c C-t p
Insert a procedure template (@code{maplev-template-proc}).  
The user is queried for the name, arguments, and a description of the procedure.
Any of the entries can be left blank.  If the name is blank then an
anonymous procedure is inserted, otherwise an assignment is inserted
with the procedure assigned to the given name.  Backquotes are added
automatically to procedure names if required by Maple.

@item C-c C-t m
@kindex C-c C-t m
Insert a module template (@code{maplev-template-module}).
Similar to @code{maplev-template-proc} but inserts a module.

@item C-c C-t u
@kindex C-c C-t C-u
Insert a @code{use} template (@code{maplev-template-use}).

@item C-;
Insert an assignment operator at the end of the current line
(@code{maplev-insert-assignment-operator}).

@end table


The following variables affect the shortcuts:

@vtable @code
@item maplev-insert-copyright-flag
If non-nil then a copyright notice is inserted in the @code{option}
declaration of the procedure template.  The default is @code{t}.

@item maplev-copyright-owner
String inserted as the copyright owner.

@item maplev-comment-end-flag
If non-nil then the name of the procedure is inserted as a comment to
the right of the closing @code{end} statement.

@item maplev-assignment-operator
The string inserted by @code{maplev-insert-assignment-operator}.
The default value is @samp{ := }.

@end vtable



@node Imenu support, Miscellaneous features, Shortcuts, top
@chapter Imenu support
@cindex Imenu
@cindex Index, procedures
@cindex Procedure index

@findex maplev-add-imenu

Executing @kbd{maplev-add-imenu} or selecting @kbd{MapleV -> Add Index}
from the menubar creates an indexed menu of the top-level Maple
procedures, global variables, and macro assignments.  The menu appears
under the @samp{Index} heading in the menubar.  Clicking on an item in
the menu moves point to the assignment of that item.

The assignments must be flush left to be indexed.
Only the first macro in a @code{macro} assignment is indexed.

@node Miscellaneous features, Configuration, Imenu support, top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Miscellaneous features
@cindex Miscellaneous

@menu
* Include statements::          Active include statements.
* LINK::                        Hyperlink to a file.
* Indent trace output::         Hierarchically indent Maple trace output.
@end menu

@node Include statements, LINK, Miscellaneous features, Miscellaneous features
@section Include statements
@cindex Include

@findex maplev-find-include-file-at-point
Maple include statements, such as @code{$include <somefile>},
are font-locked and active.  
Clicking on them, or typing @kbd{C-c C-o},
calls @kbd{maplev-find-include-file-at-point},
which searches for the file and, if successful, opens it.
If the path exists, but the file does not, the user is
asked whether to create the file.  

@vindex maplev-include-path
The include path can be assigned, as a list of strings,
to the @code{:include-path} slot of @code{maplev-config};
see @ref{Configuration}.
The paths are searched in the order of occurrence in the list.

@vindex maplev-include-file-other-window-flag
The customizable variable @kbd{maplev-include-file-other-window-flag}
determines whether the file is opened in the current window or 
another window.

@node LINK, Indent trace output, Include statements, Miscellaneous features
@section Link
@cindex LINK

A flush-left Maple comment @code{#LINK @file{filename}}
inserts a hyper link to the filename.  For example,

@example
#LINK Bark.mpl
@end example


@node Indent trace output,  , LINK, Miscellaneous features
@section Indent trace output
@cindex Indent trace

The Maple @code{trace} command causes Maple to print the
assignments that occur in selected procedures.
The following commands can be used to hierarchically
indent the resulting output in an Emacs buffer.
To be sensible, the output should be created with
@code{interface(prettyprint=0)}.

@table @code

@findex maplev-trace-indent-buffer
@item maplev-trace-indent-buffer
Hierarchically indent all Maple trace output in the buffer.

@findex maplev-trace-indent-region
@item maplev-trace-indent-region
Hierarchically indent selected region in the buffer.

@vindex maplev-trace-indent
@item maplev-trace-indent
Emacs variable that sets the indentation level for trace output.
The default is four spaces.

@end table       


@node Configuration, Mint, Miscellaneous features, top
@chapter Configuration
@cindex Configuration
@vindex maplev-load-config-file-flag
@vindex default-directory

For MapleV-mode
 to access Maple,
  display Maple help pages,
  and use Mint@footnote{Mint is the Maple syntax checker.},
it needs to be told where to find the Maple binaries and libraries.
This information is stored in an @code{eieio} object
of class @code{maplev-config-class}.
For details about objects, see @ref{Top,,, eieio, The EIEIO Manual}.

The global variable @code{maplev-config-default} stores the default settings.
It can be configured by executing @kbd{M-x customize-group @key{RET} maplev}.
Select @emph{MapleV Config Default} and fill in the fields,
which are described in the following sections.
@vindex maplev-config-default

To assign a project-specific include-path,
or to use a release of Maple different from the default,
put appropriate lisp code in a @file{.maplev} file.
When Maplev-mode is applied to a buffer
  it searches for a @file{.maplev} file
  if the flag @code{maplev-load-config-file-flag} is non-nil.
The search begins in @code{default-directory},
which is typically the directory associated with the current buffer,
  and moves upward through the file hierarchy, 
  stopping when the file is found or root is reached.
If the file is found, it is loaded as an Emacs lisp file.
@cindex .maplev
@vindex maplev-load-config-file-flag
@vindex default-directory

@menu
* Configuration Object::        Configuring MapleV executables and their options.
* Configuration Example::       Example configuration (.maplev file).
@end menu

@node Configuration Object, Configuration Example, Configuration, Configuration
@section Configuration Object
@cindex Configuration Object
@findex maplev-config
@vindex maplev-config-class

The function @code{maplev-config} constructs 
an @code{eieio} object of class @code{maplev-config-class}
and assigns it to the eponymous buffer-local variable @code{maplev-config}.
For details about objects, see @ref{Top,,, eieio, The EIEIO Manual}.
The following fields are defined.

@table @kbd

@item :bindir
Location of the installed Maple binary directory.
Can be obtained in Maple from @code{kernelopts('bindir')}.
This is needed to access the library used by @command{pmaple}.
If left as @code{nil}, the default, this field is automatically
assigned by the function @code{maplev-config}
provided the @code{:maple} slot is properly assigned.

@item :compile
Shell command to build and install a Maple archive.
If assigned, the string is assigned to the Emacs lisp
variable @code{compile-command}, which is then made buffer-local.
Executing the Emacs function @code{compile} in a MapleV buffer
that uses this configuration runs the assigned shell command.
Typically assigned to a @command{make} command.
@xref{Configuration Example}.

@item :include-path
A string or list of strings of directories to search for files
specified with @code{$include} statements in Maple source files.
Used by @command{mint},
by hyperlinked @code{$include} statements,
and by the @code{mpldoc} tester;
see the @code{:tester} entry, below.

@item :maple
Shell command to execute tty (command-line) Maple.
@xref{Maple}.

@item :mapledir
The path to the installation of Maple.
Should be the same as that returned by @code{kernelopts('mapledir')}.
If left as @code{nil}, the default, this field is automatically
assigned by the function @code{maplev-config}
provided the @code{:maple} slot is properly assigned.

@item :maple-options
A string of options to pass to @command{maple}.
The default is @samp{-B -A2 -e2}.
See the Maple help page for @command{maple}
for a description of the available options.

@item :mint
Shell command to execute Mint, the Maple syntax-checker.
@xref{Mint}.

@item :mint-options
A string of options to pass to @command{mint},
the Maple syntax checker.
The default is @samp{-i2 -q -v}.
The use of the verbose option, @samp{-v},
is necessary so that @command{mint} output for include files
shows the path to the file; the information is used 
to jump to the source location of a mint warning.
Maplesoft developers: be aware that @command{smint} 
use @samp{-V} for the verbose option.
See the Maple help page for @command{mint}
for a description of the available options.

@item :pmaple
Absolute path to pmaple executable.
This is used to display Maple help pages, procedures,
and to directly communicate with Maple.
The executable should in @file{user-emacs-directory/maple/bin},
where @code{user-emacs-directory} is the value of that
variable and typically @file{$HOME/.emacs.d}.

@item :tester
Shell command to execute Maplesoft @command{tester}.
Used by @code{mpldoc-test-run-tester}, 
which is part of the @code{mpldoc} package.
@xref{Testing,, Testing, mpldoc, The Mpldoc Manual}.
Use of this requires access to Maplesoft's @code{tester} facility.

@item :tester-options
A string of options to pass to @command{tester}.  See above.
The default is nil.

@end table


@node Configuration Example,  , Configuration Object, Configuration
@section Configuration Example 

Following is a typical example of the content of a @file{.maplev} file,
for a Maple package/project named @code{Bark}.

@example
(let ((proj-root (concat (getenv "HOME") "/maple/Bark")))
  (maplev-config
   :maple-options "-B -A2 -e2"  ; setup libname and error/assert levels
   :mint-options "-l"           ; ignore leading underscore
   :include-path proj-root      ; used by maple and mint
   :compile (format "make -C %s mla-install" proj-root))) ; 
@end example
@cindex .maplev

The @code{:compile} value in this example is a shell command
that passes the @code{mla-install} target
to a project-specific @file{Makefile}.  
The associated rule in the @file{Makefile}
builds and installs the Maple library archive, @file{Bark.mla}.




@node Mint, Maple, Configuration, top
@chapter Mint
@cindex Mint
@cindex Syntax checking
@cindex Checking syntax

Mint is Maple's syntax checker. It analyzes a Maple program and produces
a report about the syntax and variable usage.  MapleV can run
@command{mint} on the entire buffer or a portion of it.  The output of
mint is displayed in a buffer with a special mode, @code{mint-mode},
that provides a convenient means for locating and correcting syntax
errors.

To allow Emacs to run @command{mint},
the @code{:mint}, @code{:mint-options}, and @code{:include-path}
slots of @code{maplev-config} must be properly configured.
@xref{Configuration}.

@menu
* Running mint::                Commands for sending code to @command{mint}.
* Mint mode::                   Mode for viewing the output of @command{mint}.
@end menu


@node Running mint, Mint mode, Mint, Mint
@section Running mint
@cindex Running mint
@cindex Mint, running

@kindex C-c @key{RET} b
@kindex C-c @key{RET} p
@kindex C-c @key{RET} r
@kindex C-c @key{RET} @key{RET}

@findex mint-buffer
@findex mint-procedure
@findex mint-region
@findex mint-rerun

The following commands send source code in the buffer to @command{mint}:

@table @kbd
@item C-c @key{RET} b
Run @command{mint} on the buffer (@code{mint-buffer}).

@item C-c @key{RET} p
Run @command{mint} on the current procedure (@code{mint-procedure}).

@item C-c @key{RET} r
Run @command{mint} on the marked region (@code{mint-region}).

@item C-c @key{RET} @key{RET}
Rerun the previous @command{mint} command (@code{mint-rerun}).

@end table

These commands are available through the menubar, @kbd{MapleV -> Mint}.


@node Mint mode,  , Running mint, Mint
@section Mint mode
@cindex Mint mode
@cindex Mode, Mint

Mint mode is applied to mint's output buffer.  Warnings and errors are
font locked and activated.  Moving the mouse pointer over active text
highlights it; clicking it (@kbd{mouse-1}) either moves the cursor to
the appropriate point in the source code or queries to automatically
correct an error.  Using @kbd{mouse-3} on any of the highlighted
variables in a mint message applies the action to all the variables.

The following commands are available:

@table @kbd
@item s
Incremental forward search (@code{isearch-forward}).

@item r
Incremental backward search (@code{isearch-backward}).

@item @key{RET}
Re-execute the previous mint command (@code{mint-rerun}).

@item @key{DEL}
Scroll down (@code{scroll-down}).

@item @key{SPC}
Scroll up (@code{scroll-up}).

@item mouse-1
Goto location in source, or fix error, depending on the active text.

@item mouse-3
Similar to @kbd{mouse-1} but uses all the variables in the mint message.

@end table

The following variables set the display faces for the highlighted text in the
mint buffer:

@vtable @code
@item mint-proc-face
Face for procedure names.

@item mint-warning-face
Face for warnings.

@item mint-error-face
Face for errors.

@item mint-note-face
Face for notes (usually @samp{on line}).

@end vtable



@node Maple, Help pages, Mint, top
@chapter Maple
@cindex Cmaple
@cindex Maple, command line

The command line version of Maple can be started in a buffer.  All or
portions of the code in the MapleV buffer can be passed directly to the
Maple process.  Maple commands can be directly executed in the buffer.

@menu
* Running Maple::               Commands for sending code to the Maple engine.
* Cmaple mode::                 Mode for interacting with Maple.
@end menu


@node Running Maple, Cmaple mode, Maple, Maple
@section Running Maple
@cindex Cmaple, running
@cindex Running, Cmaple

@kindex C-c C-c b
@kindex C-c C-c p
@kindex C-c C-c r
@kindex C-c C-c g
@kindex C-c C-c i
@kindex C-c C-c k

@findex cmaplev-send-buffer
@findex cmaplev-send-procedure
@findex cmaplev-send-region
@findex cmaplev-goto-buffer
@findex cmaplev-interrupt
@findex cmaplev-kill

The following commands in the MapleV buffer affect the Maple engine:

@table @kbd
@item C-c C-c b
Send the entire buffer to the Maple engine (@code{cmaplev-send-buffer}).

@item C-c C-c p
Send the current procedure to the Maple engine
(@code{cmaplev-send-procedure}).

@item C-c C-c r
Send the marked region to the Maple engine (@code{cmaplev-send-region}).

@item C-c C-c g
Goto the Maple buffer (@code{cmaplev-goto-buffer}).

@item C-c C-c i
Interrupt the Maple engine (@code{cmaplev-interrupt}).

@item C-c C-c k
Kill the Maple engine (@code{cmaplev-kill}).

@end table

These commands are available through the menubar, @kbd{MapleV -> Maple}.


@node Cmaple mode,  , Running Maple, Maple
@section Cmaple mode
@cindex Cmaple mode
@cindex Mode, cmaple

The command line version of Maple is run in a buffer with the mode
@code{cmaple-process-mode} that is based on @code{comint-mode}.
@inforef{Shell Mode,,emacs} for more information.
In addition to the normal @code{comint} commands, the following commands
are available:

@table @kbd
@item ?
@itemx C-?
Display a Maple help topic (@pxref{Help pages}).

@item M-?
Display a Maple expression (@pxref{Viewing}).

@end table



@node Help pages, Viewing, Maple, top
@chapter Help pages
@cindex Help pages, Maple
@cindex Maple help pages

Help pages can be read from the Maple help databases and displayed in a
buffer with major mode @code{maplev-help-mode}.  Text in the buffer is
highlighted and cross references are activated.

@menu
* Displaying help pages::       Commands for displaying Maple help pages.
* MapleV help mode::            Mode for viewing Maple help pages.
@end menu


@node Displaying help pages, MapleV help mode, Help pages, Help pages
@section Displaying help pages

@kindex C-?
@kindex S-mouse-2

@findex maplev-help-at-point
@findex maplev-help-follow-mouse

The following commands display Maple help pages:

@table @kbd
@item C-?
Query for a help topic, using the word at point as a default.  Display
the help page in a buffer (@code{maplev-help-at-point}).

@item S-mouse-2
Display the Maple help page for the topic at the click
(@code{maplev-help-follow-mouse}).

@end table

Help pages are displayed in a buffer with major mode
@code{maplev-help-mode}.
@ifinfo 
@xref{MapleV help mode}.
@end ifinfo


@node MapleV help mode,  , Displaying help pages, Help pages
@section MapleV help mode
@cindex MapleV help mode
@cindex Mode, help, MapleV
@cindex History, help mode

@findex maplev-help-mode
@findex maplev-clear-history

The major mode @code{maplev-help-mode} is active in the buffer that
displays Maple help pages.  Section headers are font locked and text in
the @samp{See Also} section is activated so that clicking on it opens
the help page for the topic.  The following commands are available:

@kindex s
@kindex p
@kindex n
@kindex P
@kindex r
@kindex ?

@table @kbd
@item s
Incremental forward search (@code{isearch-forward}).

@item p
Previous help topic (@code{maplev-prev-item}).

@item n
Next help topic (@code{maplev-next-item}).

@item P
Parent help topic (@code{maplev-help-parent}).

@item r
Redraw help page (@code{maple-redo-item}).

@item ?
@itemx C-?
@itemx @key{RTN}
Query for a help topic (@code{maplev-help-at-point}).

@item M-?
Query for a procedure (@code{maplev-proc-at-point}).

@item @key{SPC}
Scroll down.

@item @key{DEL}
Scroll up.

@end table

MapleV help mode keeps a history of the help topics displayed.
Use the command @code{maplev-clear-history} to erase the history.

The help page for a chosen topic is displayed by sending the string
@samp{?TOPIC} to the Maple engine and capturing the output.  If the
Maple engine is busy an error message, @samp{Maple busy}, is displayed in
the message window.  



@node Viewing, Installation, Help pages, top
@chapter Viewing
@cindex Viewing, Maple

Maple code for modules and procedures stored in Maple libraries, or
otherwise known to Maple, can be displayed in a buffer with major mode
@code{maplev-view-mode}.  The code is font-locked the same as in MapleV
mode.

@menu
* Displaying::                  Commands to display Maple expressions.
* MapleV view mode::            Mode for viewing Maple library code.
@end menu


@node Displaying, MapleV view mode, Viewing, Viewing
@section Displaying procedures
@kindex M-?
@kindex M-S-mouse-2

@findex maplev-view-at-point
@findex maplev-view-follow-point

The following commands display Maple procedures:

@table @kbd
@item M-?
Query for a module or procedure name, using the word at point as the default.
Display the code in a buffer (@code{maplev-view-at-point}).

@item M-S-mouse-2
Display the module or procedure at the click in a buffer (@code{maplev-view-follow-point}).

@end table

Procedures are displayed in a buffer with major mode
@code{maplev-view-mode}.
@ifinfo
@xref{MapleV view mode}.
@end ifinfo


@node MapleV view mode,  , Displaying, Viewing
@section MapleV view mode
@cindex MapleV view mode
@cindex Mode, view, MapleV
@cindex History, view mode

@findex maplev-view-mode
The major mode @code{maplev-view-mode} is active in the buffer that
displays Maple modules and procedures read from a Maple library.  It
font-locks the code, highlighting keywords the same as MapleV mode
does.  Clicking on a name in the buffer displays its source
code or opens a help page for them.  A history mechanism stores the
previously displayed procedure.

The following commands are available:

@table @kbd
@item s
Incremental forward search (@code{isearch-forward}).

@item p
Previous procedure (@code{maplev-prev-item}).

@item n
Next procedure (@code{maplev-next-item}).

@item r
Redraw procedure (@code{maple-redo-item}).

@item ?
@itemx C-?
@itemx @key{RTN}
Query for a help topic (@code{maplev-help-at-point}).

@item M-?
Query for a procedure (@code{maplev-view-at-point}).

@item @key{SPC}
Scroll down.

@item @key{DEL}
Scroll up.

@end table

MapleV help mode keeps a history of the help topics displayed.
Use the command @code{maplev-clear-history} to erase the history.

A procedure is read from a library and displayed by using the Maple
procedure @samp{maplev_print} that is assigned when the Maple engine is
started.  If the Maple engine is busy an error message, @samp{Maple
busy}, is displayed in the message window.


@c Appendices

@node Installation, Evolution, Viewing, top
@appendix Installation

@cindex Installation
@cindex @file{.emacs}
@cindex Initialization
@cindex Customization

This section describes how to install MapleV into GNU Emacs.

@menu
* Emacs Files::                 Installing and byte-compiling the lisp files
* Maple Files::                 Installing the Maple archive
* Customizing::                 Customizing the installation.
* Info documentation::          Installing the Info documentation.
@end menu

@node Emacs Files, Maple Files, Installation, Installation
@section Emacs Files

Install the Emacs lisp files, those with extension @file{.el},
into the directory @file{~/.emacs.d/maple}.
The tilde, @file{~}, corresponds to your home directory.

Byte-compile them from Emacs with the command

@example
@kbd{C-u 0 M-x byte-recompile-directory @key{RET} ~/emacs.d/maple @key{RET}}
@end example

Add the following line to your @file{.emacs} file@footnote{Be careful
copying and pasting any of the elisp code in this section from a PDF document,
the forward quotes may be rendered incorrectly.}


@example
(add-to-list 'load-path (concat user-emacs-directory "maple"))
(autoload 'maplev-mode "maplev" "Maple editing mode" 'interactive)
@end example

To have Emacs auto-magically start in MapleV mode when editing Maple
source, add the following to your @file{.emacs} file, modifying the
regular expression as needed.

@example
(setq auto-mode-alist 
      (cons `("\\.mpl\\'" . maplev-mode) auto-mode-alist))
@end example

@node Maple Files, Customizing, Emacs Files, Installation
@section Maple Files

A Maple archive file, @file{maplev.mla}, containing code
used by @code{maplev-view}, is provided with the distribution.
If desired it can be rebuilt from source by removing the existing file
and executing

@example
maple maple/maplev.mpl
@end example

The file @file{maplev.mla} should be installed at @file{~/maple/toolbox/emacs/lib}.

@node Customizing, Info documentation, Maple Files, Installation
@section Customizing

The default settings for MapleV can can be customized
by executing, in Emacs, the following commands.

@example
M-x load-library @key{RET} maplev @key{RET}
M-x customize-group @key{RET} maplev @key{RET}
@end example


@node Info documentation,  , Customizing, Installation
@section Info documentation

Install the included @file{maplev.info} file to a directory
in the Info load path and then edit the @file{dir} to point
to it.  I add the following menu item to my @file{dir} file:

@example
* MapleV: (maplev).       MapleV reference manual.
@end example




@node Evolution, Key Index, Installation, top
@appendix Evolution


@menu
* Bugs::
* Acknowledgments::
@end menu

@node Bugs, Acknowledgments, Evolution, Evolution
@section Bugs

If you encounter a bug in this package, wish to suggest an enhancement,
or want to make a smart remark, then send an email to me:

   Joseph S. Riel (Joe Riel) @email{jriel@@maplesoft.com}


@node Acknowledgments,  , Bugs, Evolution
@section Acknowledgements
@cindex Acknowledgements
@cindex Credits
@cindex Gap mode

I'd like to thank a number of people who have contributed, either
directly or indirectly, to this package.


@table @b
@item Bruno Salvy
For writing @code{maple-mode}, a small but useful Emacs
mode for editing Maple code.

@item Michael Smith
For writing @code{Gap-mode} and @code{Gap-process}.
These gave me the idea, and showed me how, to display help pages.
Displaying source code from the Maple libraries was a natural extension.
@code{Gap} is a CAS specialized for group theory.

@item Nicholas Thi@'ery
For writing @code{Maple-mode}, another Emacs mode for
editing Maple code.  It introduced the idea of using a grammar to indent
Maple source code.

@item Bob Glickstein
For writing @cite{Writing GNU Emacs Extensions}.
It allowed me, a novice Elisp programmer, to put it all together.

@item Christian Pomar
For courageously agreeing to test a series of alpha
versions of this package.  He found numerous errors and suggested many
improvements.

@item Erik Postma
For providing useful feedback and suggested enhancements.

@end table


@node Key Index, Function Index, Evolution, top
@comment    node-name,         next,       previous, up
@unnumbered Key Index
@printindex ky

@node Function Index, Variable Index, Key Index, top
@comment    node-name,         next,       previous, up
@unnumbered Function Index
@printindex fn

@node Variable Index, Concept Index, Function Index, top
@comment    node-name,         next,       previous, up
@unnumbered Variable Index
@printindex vr

@node Concept Index, GNU Free Documentation License, Variable Index, top
@comment    node-name,         next,       previous, up
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@node GNU Free Documentation License,  , Concept Index, top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@summarycontents
@contents
@bye

